## Barder Response

------

What was the toaster project? What did Thomas Thwaites attempt to do? Was he successful?  What is the significance of this example in the context of complexity?

3. The toaster project was a project done by a British design student who attempted to make an electric toaster entirely from scratch. He was semi successful, as he was able to create a toaster that worked for five seconds, before it burst into flames.  Thwaites was unable to acquire rubber, so the uninsulated copper wires quickly malfunctioned. The significance of this example in the context of complexity is in proving that even a cheap toaster, costing less than five euros, is nearly impossible to make on one's own.  This proves that in developing countries, the economy has to be sophisticated enough to develop products. Simply having the raw materials needed for producing the toaster was not enough, the economy and society must be developed enough to incorporate various measures of production, and combine them to create a toaster.  Within the context of development, this shows that development is not simply the increase in output by a single firm, but it is when a system of firms, products, technology, and social and political institutions combine.



What is a complex adaptive system? What are some of its important features?

12. Complex adaptive systems are systems that are circumstances where the economy and society are comprised of various interactions between evolving adaptive agents that ebb and flow together. There are five key features of complex adaptive systems.  Firstly, complex adaptive systems are impossible to predict in detail.  This is represented by the butterfly effect, the idea that in a nonlinear system, even a small change, like the flapping of a butterfly’s wings, can create change across the system, like a hurricane on the other side of the world. Secondly, while detail may be impossible to predict, broad predictions can be made about the system as a whole.  In complex adaptive systems, systems will show patterns of self-organized global order that can make rough generalizations.  Third, complex adaptive systems have emergent properties, meaning there are patterns within the system that are not necessarily linked to any individual agent within the system. Fourth, complex adaptive systems tend towards greater complexity.  While economic models focus on simplicity and equilibrium, complex adaptive systems are more complex, and thus do not tend towards equilibrium.  This brings us to the last feature that systems do not tend towards an equilibrium, as each agent is evolving in the light of the environment that it faces.  The combination of co-evolution means that there is no equilibrium in the movement of the economy.