# Response to Joshua Blumenstock's article

# How do you respond to these ideas regarding “good intent”, “transparency” and the difficult “balancing act” when considering the intersection of human development with data science?

When responding to the ideas of good intent, transparency, and the balancing act when considering the intersection of human development and data science, one must remember that while people and corporations may seem to have the best intentions, often decisions are made based on monetary gain.  While in some industries this may be in the best interest, the data science industry deals with personal data, which if used in the wrong way can have debilitating impacts.  This problem then raises two questions.  First, is “good intent” enough when the data itself is unknowingly biased, and second how much transparency is too much when dealing with sensitive data.

It is easy for corporations promoting human development to claim they have the best intent in promoting human development, and most corporations working for this goal do have good intents.  However, one must keep in mind the nature of humans to act in their own interests, which often equates to monetary gain.  Because of this nature, those in power will be tempted to use data for their own gain, whether it be through selling data or misusing it.  For example, according to Blumenstock, solutions enabled by big data often bolster those who are already empowered, taking away the good intentions.  Another obstacle that comes with the intersection of data science and human development is inherently biased data that may be discriminatory.  Often times tools are based off of inconsistent or patchy data, and those who are misrepresented in the data become marginalized when the solutions are put into effect.  This problem of biased data is especially problematic in emerging economies, as they are the most underrepresented in data and often need help with human development the most.

When examining the issue of transparency in relation to data science, one can not simply say that the utmost transparency is the solution.  This is because the data used in relation to human development is often sensitive, and can be abused if acquired by the wrong person.  Because of that, the data itself should not be completely transparent, but instead companies should be transparent on their use of data.  For example, one solution could be to have independent or government personal “audit” companies that deal with big data to ensure that data is not being mishandled.  In the question of transparency, as proposed by Blumenstock, there should be deeper collaboration between data scientists, development experts, governments, and the private sector, as to not only ensure the proper use of data, but to also increase the quality of data as well as the quality of the solutions.
