
# Response to Selim Jahan's article

When asked about human development, most people immediately think of economics.  Human development as traditionally discussed has to do with economic improvement, which in theory increases quality of life.  However, Selim Jahan and Hans Rosling both seek to change how human development is studied, by shifting the focus away from economics.  

When defining human development, Jahan definition does not include any reference to economics, saying that human development is the enhancement of the power of choice making, and that there are two sides to human development. Firstly, the capabilities of human beings have to be enhanced, and second, the opportunities to use those capabilities have to be improved. Rather than promoting these capabilities and opportunities through economics, Jahan claims that human development is of the people, for the people, and by the people.  This statement, borrowed from Thomas Jefferson, emphasizes the people as opposed to the economy.  Another important idea to Jahan’s argument is the idea of focus vs breadth.  Breadth refers to the comprehensive ideas and goals of human development, and focus refers to the specific measures used to better human development.  The focus measure of human development is the Human Development Index, which captures the basic attributes of human development. These attributes include a long and healthy life, knowledge, and a decent standard of living. The idea of these focus measures of human development is to concentrate on these key areas, which would open doors for more choices, bettering human development.  Instead of focusing on solely bettering the economy of a country, the focus should be on improving specific qualities of life. 
 
This idea of focus is similar to Hans Rosling’s definition and ideas of human development, as Rosling argues that economic improvement is not the solution to human development, but rather the goal.  While there are many focus areas and solutions used to better human development, the main focus area used by Rosling was health,  Rosling described nations, like the United Arab Emirates, that needed to become healthy before becoming wealthy.  The UAE was a relatively wealthy country, however they had shorter life spans and higher births than many developed countries. Because of this, the UAE decided to focus on the health of their citizens, and despite falling oil prices, still improved their wealth.  This improvement of their economy is one goal and measure of human development, but the means to this goal is through the focus of improving the wealth of the country.  Another connection between Rosling and Jahan’s idea of focus is through the danger of averages as warned by Hans Rosling.  Rosling warned that one can not examine the average of a country's development, because of the vastly different populations within a country.  For example, the wealthiest 20% of the population of South Africa are vastly more healthy than the poorest 20%, yet we still promote solutions that fail to account for the socioeconomic differences in the African populations.  This issue is most exemplified by people referring to solutions to human development in “Africa,” however each African country and the people within each country are vastly different, meaning that solutions need to be contextualized in order to provide meaningful aid.  To combat this issue of over generalizing, focus measures must be used to improve human development in specific places and specific groups of people, which may need individualized solutions.
